.\" Copyright (c) 2026 pkgconf authors (see AUTHORS).
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" This software is provided 'as is' and without any warranty, express or
.\" implied.  In no event shall the authors be liable for any damages arising
.\" from the use of this software.
.Dd June 28, 2026
.Dt PCCRITIC 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pccritic
.Nd a quality scorer for pkg-config files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar options
.Ar module-or-file ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
inspects
.Xr pc 5
files and reports quality findings, assigning each file a score from 0 to 100
and a letter grade from A to F.
It is intended both as an interactive aid for package authors and as a check
that can be run in continuous integration.
.Pp
Each command-line argument is treated as a target.
If an argument contains a slash or ends in
.Pa .pc
it is interpreted as a path to a file; otherwise it is resolved as a module
name from the search path, exactly as
.Xr pkgconf 1
would resolve it.
A file that
.Xr pkgconf 1
refuses to load because it omits a required field is still scanned directly so
that the most broken files can be scored.
.Pp
Findings are classified by severity.
The score begins at 100 and each finding subtracts a fixed penalty: 25 for a
.Em critical
finding, 10 for a
.Em major
finding, 4 for a
.Em minor
finding, and 1 for an
.Em info
finding.
The result is clamped to the range 0 to 100.
Grades are assigned as A for 90 and above, B for 80, C for 70, D for 60, and F
below 60.
.Pp
The checks cover required and recommended metadata, version sanity,
relocatability of the
.Ic libdir
and
.Ic includedir
variables, hygiene of the
.Ic Cflags
and
.Ic Libs
fields, the
.Ic Requires
and
.Ic Requires.private
relationship, and basic file-formatting style.
.Pp
The
.Ar options
are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl -about
Print the version number, the Copyright notice, and the license of the
.Nm
program to standard output and exit.
.It Fl -version
Print the version number of the
.Nm
program to standard output and exit.
.It Fl -help
Print a short usage summary to standard output and exit.
.It Fl -quiet
Print only the score and grade for each target, one per line, instead of the
full list of findings.
.It Fl -min-score Ar n
Exit with a non-zero status if any target scores below
.Ar n .
This is useful for failing a continuous-integration job when a file's quality
regresses below a threshold.
.It Fl -color Ns Op = Ns Ar when
Control colorized output.
.Ar when
may be
.Cm auto
(the default),
.Cm always ,
or
.Cm never .
When
.Cm auto ,
color is enabled only when standard output is a terminal and the
.Ev NO_COLOR
environment variable is not set.
Giving
.Fl -color
without a value is equivalent to
.Cm always .
.It Fl -define-variable Ns = Ns Ar varname Ns = Ns Ar value
Define
.Ar varname
as
.Ar value .
This affects how variables in the inspected file are expanded.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
exits 0 on success.
It exits non-zero if a target could not be loaded, if the command line is
invalid, or if
.Fl -min-score
was given and a target scored below the threshold.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Score an installed module by name:
.Pp
.Dl $ pccritic zlib
.Pp
Score a file before installation and fail if it grades below a C:
.Pp
.Dl $ pccritic --min-score 70 ./mylib.pc
.Pp
Summarize every file in a directory:
.Pp
.Dl $ pccritic --quiet /usr/lib/pkgconfig/*.pc
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkgconf 1 ,
.Xr pc 5
